 The craftsmen/designers/ artists/engineers who design our environment have been freed from many physical constraints previously considered fundamental. If you get ill, the medicines given to cure you will have been designed using computers. In all of these examples, we see computers as something that enables us to do something we would have had a harder time doing without computers.

Every one of those computers runs software. Without software, they would just be expensive lumps of silicon, metal, and plastic: doorstops, boat anchors, and space heaters. Every line of that software was written by some individual. Every one of those lines that was actually executed was minimally reasonable, if not correct. It’s amazing that it all works! We are talking about billions of lines of code (program text) in hundreds of programming languages. Getting all that to work took a staggering amount of effort and involved an unimaginable number of skills. We want further improvements to essentially every service and gadget we depend on. Just think of any one service and gadget you rely on; what would you like to see improved? If nothing else, we want our services and gadgets smaller (or bigger), faster, more reliable, with more features, easier to use, with higher capacity, better looking, and cheaper. The likelihood is that the improvement you thought of requires some programming.

The myth of a programmer being isolated is just that: a myth. People who like to work on their own choose areas of work where that is most feasible and usually complain bitterly about the number of “interruptions” and meetings. People who prefer to interact with other people have an easier time because modern software development is a team activity. The implication is that social and communication skills are essential and valued far more than the stereotypes indicate. On a short list of highly desirable skills for a programmer (however you realistically define programmer), you find the ability to communicate well — with people from a wide variety of backgrounds — informally, in meetings, in writing, and in formal presentations. We are convinced that until you have completed a team project or two, you have no idea of what programming is and whether you really like it. Among the things we like about programming are all the nice and interesting people we meet and the variety of places we get to visit as part of our professional lives

One implication of all this is that people with a wide variety of skills, interests, and work habits are essential for producing good software. Our quality of life depends on those people — sometimes even our life itself. No one person could fill all the roles we mention here; no sensible person would want every role. The point is that you have a wider choice than you could possibly imagine; not that you have to make any particular choice. As an individual you will “drift” toward areas of work that match your skills, talents, and interests. We talk about “programmers” and “programming,” but obviously programming is only part of the overall picture. The people who design a ship or a cell phone don’t think of themselves as programmers. Programming is an important part of software development, but not all there is to software development. Similarly, for most products, software development is an important part of product development, but not all there is to product development. We do not assume that you — our reader — want to become a professional programmer and spend the rest of your working life writing code. Even the best programmers — especially the best programmers — spend most of their time not writing code. Understanding problems takes serious time and often requires significant intellectual effort. That intellectual challenge is what many programmers refer to when they say that programming is interesting. Many of the best programmers also have degrees in subjects not usually considered part of computer science. For example, if you work on software for genomic research, you will be much more effective if you understand some molecular biology. If you work on programs for analyzing medieval literature, you could be much better off reading a bit of that literature and maybe even knowing one or more of the relevant languages. In particular, a person with an “all I care about is computers and programming” attitude will be incapable of interacting with his or her non-programmer colleagues. Such a person will not only miss out on the best parts of human interactions (i.e., life) but also be a bad software developer.

 Don’t start from scratch unless you really have to

 